Spam Protection
===============

Comment spamming and other types of spamming have become common problems
for systems that permit user-submitted information. If you are not
familiar with comment spamming, it is when someone repeatedly submits
malicious comments into your system. This can be done by someone
manually, or if the person is more sophisticated, it can be done using
scripts designed to insert hundreds, or even thousands of comments
automatically. The purpose of spam is to increase traffic at the
spammer's web site. By leaving comments linking to their site, they
increase their position in Search Engine listings.

ExpressionEngine has several security features aimed at preventing
spamming. There is no "silver bullet", as spammers adapt their tactics
to new deterrents, but the combination of security features in
ExpressionEngine will provide a high degree of safety, particularly
against the automated spamming methods.

Blacklists
----------

The ExpressionEngine :doc:`Blacklist/Whitelist Module
</modules/blacklist/index>` is an integral part of EE's spam prevention
capability. This Module allows you to specify URLs, IP addresses, and
user agents that you want to deny (blacklist) or specifically allow
(whitelist) from your site.

The blacklist checks all content that is submitted to your site.
ExpressionEngine will compare the submitted content against your
blacklist/whitelist and then behave accordingly.

CAPTCHAs
--------

A CAPTCHA is a computer-generated test that humans can pass but computer
programs cannot. Since a great deal of spam is generated by automated
scripts or "bots", a CAPTCHA can be effective at preventing their use.

When the CAPTCHA is enabled, an image containing a random word appears
next to the comment and member registration forms. In order to submit
the form, the word must be typed into a form field.

ExpressionEngine can use :doc:`CAPTCHAs <captchas>` for comment
submission and member registration.

Comment Time Interval
---------------------

This setting defines the amount of time that must lapse between comment
postings. A malicious user will have to wait until the time has lapsed
before being able to post again.

The setting is located at: :menuselection:`Admin --> Channel Administration --> Channels --> Edit Preferences`

Rank Denial
-----------

The primary goal of spammers is to have their sites ranked highly in
Search Engines in order to generating more traffic for themselves. They
achieve this by posting comments at your site which contain links to
their own site. The more links to their site scattered in channels
across the internet, the higher Search Engines will rank them.

The Rank Denial feature denies a spammer this "ranking" benefit by
altering all links submitted by users so that they point to an
intermediary "redirect page" at your site first, before being sent to
the target destination.

The setting is located at: :menuselection:`Admin --> Security and Privacy --> Security and Sessions`

.. _secure-mode-label:

Secure Mode
-----------

Processing forms in Secure Mode prevents automated scripts (the most
common way spam is generated) from repeatedly submitting comments or
other form data. A submission is only allowed when a user manually loads
a page and submits the form from your site. And once the form data is
received, the user has to manually reload the page before they can
submit again.

The setting is located at: :menuselection:`Admin --> Security and Privacy --> Security and Sessions`

Deny Duplicate Data
-------------------

The "Deny Duplicate Data" feature prevents a comment from being accepted
if an identical one already exists in your database. A malicious person
can't submit the same information more than once.

The setting is located at: :menuselection:`Admin --> Security and Privacy --> Security and Sessions`

Site Membership
---------------

Although this isn't technically a security feature, requiring your users
to be members of your site provides additional safety against spamming
since you have better control over the people posting on your site.
