ExpressionEngine 3.x Change Log
===============================

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

Version 3.5.0
-------------

Release Date: January 16, 2017

- Added PHP 7.1 compatibility.
- Added value/label option capability to :doc:`/fieldtypes/select`
- Added ``{if has_categories}`` conditional to the Channel Entries tag.
- Added ``{category_count}``, ``{category_reverse_count}``, and ``{category_total_results}`` variables to the Channel Entries ``{categories}{/categories}`` variable pair.
- Added ``entry_id=`` and ``url_title=`` parameters to the :ref:`Related Categories Mode <related_categories_mode>` of the Channel Entries Tag, to enable this tag to function with custom template routing.
- The ``{redirect=}`` variable can now take full URLs, including external URLs instead of just path segments.
- Usernames and screen names now have a maximum length of 75 characters.
- Improved clarity and usability of File field interface.
- Greatly improved model query performance.
- The ``{category_name}`` variable is now run through typography parsing for pretty quotes and dashes.
- Updated the SimplePie parser version used by the :doc:`RSS parser </development/legacy/libraries/rss_parser>` to 1.4.3.
- Members must verify themselves when creating a member with control panel access.
- Added Email Newline and Connection Type to Outgoing Email Settings, to simplify configuration with some email providers (formerly available as config overrides only, ``email_newline`` and ``email_smtp_crypto``).
- Discussion Forums:

  - Updated code sample formatting to use the new styleable blocks. Highlight/Prism/Rainbow/etc. your code samples in forum posts.
  - Made special forum conditionals nestable.
  - Added ``{forum_id}`` variable to the Thread Rows partial.
  - Added ``{if is_moderator}`` conditionals to Threads and Thread Rows partials.
  - Added ``{topic_date}`` variable to Threads partial.
  - Added ``{topic_class}`` variable to Topic Rows partial.
  - Made Poll data available to Thread Rows, so polls can be shown inline with the author's post.

- Fixed a bug where models could not set NULL values.
- Fixed a bug where model foreign key changes did not trigger reloads.
- Fixed a bug (#20308) where you could only upload the same file name 99 times. Upload as many as you want!
- Fixed a bug on the control panel profile section's ban members page where a MySQL error occurred when searching banned members.
- Fixed an Obscurum Insectum when ``mbstring.func_overload`` is enabled, entry content contains multibyte characters, and there is a relationship field with no relationships set.
- Fixed a bug (#22864) where members registering via the Member module could not register if secure passwords were required.
- Fixed a bug (#22865) where if a high minimum username or password length was set, the validation error message would not show the configuration value correctly.
- Fixed a bug (#22867) where deleting a category from the publish screen would uncheck any existing category selections for that entry.
- Fixed a bug (#22872) where changing Channels fields from one type to another may destroy data.
- Fixed a bug (#22869) where repeated searches in the template manager may show a "Request-URI Too Large" error.
- Fixed a bug (#22874) where File fields may show an "Undefined index" error on the front end in rare cases.
- Fixed a bug (#22875) where URL titles generated by Channel Form's ``unique_url_title=`` parameter did not respect the ``word_separator`` preference.
- Fixed a bug (#22876) where the wrong member was marked as the author for entry revisions.
- Fixed a bug (#22873) where having a ``:total_rows`` Grid modifier in a conditional in a template may show an error when certain add-ons are present.
- Fixed a bug where Channel entry titles that had a ``;`` show up to the party uninvited, when an ``&`` was in the title. No longer: Channel entries titles are by invitation only.
- Altered frontend system message redirects to default to use a JavaScript redirect in order to accommodate a rare IE form submission quirk.
- Worked around a Safari bug where searching for entries in the control panel with autofill enabled on a site using SSL would repeatedly select the text in the textbox.
- Developers:

  - Added an :doc:`Encrypt service </development/services/encrypt>` that uses OpenSSL for encryption, as Mcrypt has ben deprecated as of PHP 7.1.
  - Added ``core_boot`` hook to run tasks on every ExpressionEngine request.
  - Added request caching to member field model structure to eliminate duplicate queries for some operations.


Version 3.4.7
-------------

Release Date: December 30, 2016

- Security

  - Hardened security in the Email library, prevents attacks similar to PHPMailer CVE-2016-10033, CVE-2016-10045, and Swift Mailer CVE-2016-10074.

- Optimized an inefficient query in the file model.
- Fixed a bug where the ``unique_url_title=`` title parameter was not working in Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug (#22838) where the HTML Button creation form would show a PHP error if no other HTML buttons existed.
- Fixed a bug where switching MSM sites may show a PHP error if the member is set to redirect to the publish form but no Channel is set.
- Fixed a bug (#22841) where deleting a member from their profile page would not give an option to reassign their entries.
- Fixed a bug (#22849) where deleting a member would also delete any files they had uploaded.
- Fixed a bug (#22842) where the author would have to focus the URL title field to validate the field despite it being autofilled by the Title field.
- Fixed a bug (#22013) where if saving Grid settings failed due to duplicate column labels/names, deleting the offending column would not clear the validation errors.
- Fixed a bug (#22858) where statuses on the publish form were not displayed in their set status order.


Version 3.4.6
-------------

Release Date: December 13, 2016

- Fixed a bug (#22785) where the parsing a template may show an undefined index error in rare cases.
- Fixed a bug (#22798) where RTE tool buttons may appear multiple times when rendered via Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug (#22799) where all "unauthorized" error messages came with a 500 status code instead of a 403.
- Fixed a bug (#22803) where an alternate MySQL port number entered in the installer would not get written to the config.php file.
- Fixed a bug (#22811) where there was a typo in a language key.
- Fixed a bug (#22813) where the ``relationships_display_field_options`` hook was passed invalid arguments.
- Fixed a bug (#22814) where deleting a member from their profile page may show a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#22816) where the Relationship fields could not be filtered when filtering from more than nine channels.
- Fixed a bug (#22817) where Grid and Relationship field data was not revisioned.
- Fixed a bug (#22818) where channel form inline errors for custom fields didn't display.
- Fixed an issue where the Add-on Manager would be empty on some servers by accommodating an issue (#22819) with incorrectly typed variables from the database on environments with improper/non-standard PDO configuration.
- Fixed a bug where the updater may attempt to add the same database column more than once.


Version 3.4.5
-------------

Release Date: December 6, 2016

- Added a link to the Multiple Site Manager in the site switcher menu.
- Added ``autocomplete="off"`` to all password fields in the control panel.
- Added clickjacking prevention to the URL redirect warning page.
- Improved performance of and fixed various issues filtering Relationship fields on the publish form.
- Improved accuracy of error message with File fields in Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug (#22754) where the SQL manager could not sort by table disk size.
- Fixed a bug (#22721) where the Redirect library may mistakenly think a protocol-relative URL was malicious.
- Fixed a bug (#22720) where the add-ons list in the control panel was not filtered by member access for non-Super Admins.
- Fixed a bug (#22736) where running the updater with templates saved as files may show an error.
- Fixed bugs (#22427 & #22080) where Channel Form would not allow setting of certain fields, and would eat global variables.
- Fixed a bug (#22766) where Channels that have reached their maximum entry limit may not be able to edit existing entries.
- Fixed a bug (#22761) where certain settings in the member profile would appear unsaved.
- Fixed a bug (#22030) where entry revisions were created regardless of Channel preference.
- Fixed a bug (#22089) where editing checkbox fields in Channel Form that were populated by another channel field would not show their checked status.
- Fixed a bug (#22007) where setting the ID parameter on a Channel Form would cause the date picker not to initialize.
- Fixed a bug where member notification emails were always sent in plain text regardless of the mail format setting.
- Fixed a bug where links bound with the FilePicker may have their callback overwritten with a default callback.
- Fixed a bug (#22755) where editing an entry with a Relationship field may show its entry choices in the wrong order.
- Fixed a bug (#22756) where deselecting an entry in a single Relationship field may re-select the entry upon filtering.
- Fixed a bug (#22053) where saving a ``ChannelEntry`` model with properties initialized in the ``make()`` method would show an error.
- Fixed a bug (#22008) where the ``category=`` parameter did not work in Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug (#21999) where setting the field group or status group to None when editing a Channel would not stick.
- Fixed a bug (#22777) where the settings forms with date localization settings may show an error under PHP 7.1.
- Fixed a bug (#22768) where rendering an empty file field with a variable pair would replace its ``{url}`` variable with the author's URL.
- Fixed a bug (#22795) where the saving template partials may show an invalid language key on the button while saving.
- Fixed a bug where selecting a channel when creating a new bookmarklet would not update the channel field dropdown.
- Fixed a bug (#22796) bookmarklets could not set content for more than one custom field via query string manipulation.
- Fixed a bug (#21721) where editing a URL title in an entry to change its case would show a validation error.
- Fixed a bug (#22797) where deleting a quicklink sometimes would not work.
- Fixed a bug (#21590) where custom field variable pairs could not be parsed in Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug (#21492) where the ``show=`` parameter was not working for the ``{categories}`` tag pair in Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug (#22024) where switching to an MSM site in the control panel would not respect the member's CP homepage setting.
- Fixed a bug (#22798) where the ``{entry_date}`` variable may always show the current date in Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug (#22798) where the the ``use_live_url=`` parameter would not work in Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug on the control panel profile section's ban members page where a MySQL error occurred when searching banned members.
- Fixed a security issue in the Email module.
- Fixed a bug where Super Admins could not edit Channel Form entries authored by others when ``author_only=`` was used.
- Fixed a potential bug with Channel Form with Site Manager when sites have identically named Channels.
- Fixed a bug where editing the system offline and user message page templates might truncate the closing body and html tags.
- Fixed the template order in the Channel settings Live Look drop-down. Straighten up!
- Fixed a bug where editing the system offline and user message page templates might truncate the closing body and html tags.
- Fixed a bug where bulk email sending from the Communicate page would overzealously try to send to more recipients than existed.
- Fixed the sum of the Batch emails from the Communicate page. (We love you forever, Roman Moroni.)
- Fixed a bug where you could not change an existing Channel Field from File to third-party field types with ``file`` compatibility.


Version 3.4.4
-------------

Release Date: October 27, 2016

- Added a search_id parameter to the search module tags to allow non-standard URLs to function properly (see bug #22411).
- Clarified language of the "Allow multiple logins?" Security setting (including changing to "Allow multiple sessions?").
- Fixed a bug (#21610) where deleting a Forum would show PHP errors.
- Fixed a bug (#21747) where deleting a custom field would show a PHP error in some environments.
- Fixed a bug (#22021) where actions could not be taken on items in the Spam module.
- Fixed a bug (#22026) where the legacy channel entries API was saving the ``edit_date`` in the wrong format.
- Fixed a bug (#22037) where some modules weren't updating their version numbers upon update.
- Fixed a bug (#22039) where editing a menu set link would change the link's order in the set.
- Fixed a bug (#22049) where changing the field group of a channel with a saved layout would append new fields to the Categories tab.
- Fixed a bug (#22112) where the translation utility showed the wrong value on the left.
- Fixed a bug (#22383) where deleting and then adding the same template route before saving could not be done.
- Fixed a bug (#22412) where assigned channels on member groups may be bypassed.
- Fixed a bug (#22421) where deleting a channel entry would call ``save()`` on module publish tabs.
- Fixed a bug (#22422) where the `{base_path}` variable was not being parsed in the Black/White List module.
- Fixed a bug (#22425) where automatic URL title generation for categories did not include the foreign characters array.
- Fixed a bug (#22707) where clicking the Save button after editing a form with a success alert may cause the form to shift and the button not to be clicked.
- Fixed a bug (#22711) where a non-existant language key was used on a control panel member profile form.
- Fixed a bug (#22717) where comment-editing JavaScript would not allow other events to be bound to its links.
- Fixed a bug (#22722) where an admin logging in as another member when "Allow multiple sessions?" is disabled would result in a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#22724) where file upload options were not always correct for non-superadmins in the file manager.
- Fixed a bug (#22725) where cloning a Grid column would not carry over checkbox values in some browsers.
- Fixed a bug (#22726) where some fieldtypes may show PHP errors when used in non-channel content types.
- Fixed a bug where Default Category Channel pref was not being respected in the channel entry form.
- Fixed a bug where Member custom fields were not available on the Memberlist member theme template.
- Fixed a bug where PDO was returning the wrong data types for some columns.
- Fixed a bug where channel forms using the site parameter did not display properly in layouts if there were no results.
- Fixed a bug where deleting a category group assigned to a channel that has multiple category groups would cause errors when publishing.
- Fixed a bug where field creation via the Member Importer would not create all necessary columns in the ``member_data`` table.
- Fixed a bug where invalid ``category/category-names`` in the URL did not throw ``{if no_results}``. These requests will now 404 ftw.
- Fixed a bug where simple commerce could display a PHP warning.
- Fixed a bug where the Edit Upload Directory form would not properly reflect overridden path and URL values from the config file.
- Fixed a bug where the ``{member_group}`` global variable was playing hide-and-seek. Found it!
- Fixed a bug where the category filter on the Entry Manager did not respect your category orders. Line up, soldier!
- Fixed a bug with server response times in New Relic transaction reporting for front-end requests.
- Fixed a bug with the Member Importer where member field creation validaton would not work.
- Fixed an obscure bug (#22718) where a MySQL error could occur during installation on some environments.
- Fixed security bug where XSS may be injected by query string on certain control panel pages.

Version 3.4.3
-------------

Release Date: September 20, 2016

- Security

  - Fixed a potential PHP injection issue when redirecing within the CP. (Thanks to the folks at https://www.ripstech.com with their static code analyzer RIPS)

- Improved metadata protection in Channel Form submissions.
- Optimized queries on pending/banned member tables.
- Namespaced add-ons now respond to the director's call. ACTION! (Fixed a bug where ACTION requests to namespaced add-ons failed).
- Fixed a bug (#21855) where layouts could not expand a field that was configured to be hidden.
- Fixed a bug (#22028) where opening a file picker modal in thumbnail view with an empty directory selected would show a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#22029) where where the cURL library had an incorrect query string separator.
- Fixed a bug (#22035) where ``{base_url}`` was not parsed in Pages Module URLs.
- Fixed a bug (#22081) where several site variables were not available in conditionals.
- Fixed a bug (#22114) where there was an undefined variable on the Reset Password screen.
- Fixed a bug (#22115) where front-end member registration may not have password validation.
- Fixed a bug in layouts where you could not collapse/uncollapse a field after you moved it without first saving the layout.
- Fixed a bug in the Discussion Forum where the forum order in the front end and back end did not match.
- Fixed a bug where cache files may be unable to be read by EE in certain hosting environments.
- Fixed a bug where some layout fields were being added old skool which caused PHP errors.
- Fixed a bug where the IP to Nation module could not update its IP database on PHP 7.
- Fixed a bug where the ``View All`` link on the control panel edit submenu didn't show when it should have.
- Fixed a Channel Form bug where model hooks would see the wrong author if a default Channel Form author for guest posts was set.

Version 3.4.2
-------------

Release Date: August 23, 2016

- Security

  - Enhanced XSS protection in the Simple Commerce control panel.
  - Fixed a potential HTML injection (non-XSS) issue.

- Added new Debugging & Output preference: "Enable Developer Log Alerts?"
- Added ``<mark>`` to Safe HTML Typography and are now allowing its use in Channel Entries ``{title}``.
- Eliminated some PHP warnings in the Forum template editor if a custom theme had nested folders that were not explicitly supported.
- Fixed a PHP warning on the Forum Template editor if the admin had removed the default theme.
- Fixed a bug where Channel Form fields would not prefill their values on submission error.
- Fixed a bug where Default Category Channel pref was not being respected and added some tests so that it doth not regresseth again.
- Fixed a bug where bulk actions in the forum were playing an endless game of hide-and-seek.
- Fixed a bug where caching a tag with a conditional in it would always generate a cache and never read from it.
- Fixed a bug where changing the commented status via the bulk action dropdown in the control panel affected unselected comments.
- Fixed a bug where partials created from add-ons with disallowed characters might throw a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug where the Email class would not load values from site config unless the developer had manually initialized it.
- Fixed a bug where the file picker did not have an initial sorting applied.
- Fixed a bug where updating a site's Template Settings would save all partials and variables to disk, not just the current site's.
- Fixed a bug (#21417) where some HTML Buttons could not be created due to overzealous validation.
- Fixed a bug (#21863) wherre the ``{avatar_url}`` tag was inaccurate when using a default avatar.
- Fixed a bug (#21989) where image manipulations would always save with a default site ID of 1.
- Fixed a bug (#21998) where date fields on the publish form would repopulate with a Unix timestamp after form validation failure.
- Fixed a bug (#22001) where viewing pending members sorted by join date would show an error.
- Fixed a bug (#22005) where the new category form may show encoded HTML entities in the parent category dropdown.
- Fixed a bug (#22014) where control panels under MSM might not follow a member group's CP Homepage redirect.
- Fixed a bug (#22017, #21945) where toolbar buttons within Grid cells may be removed when manipulating rows.
- Fixed a bug (#22018) where choosing a file in the filepicker could generate multiple click events.
- Fixed a bug (#22019) where the ``TemplateGroup`` model may generate duplicate queries in the control panel.

- Developers:

  - Added a parameter to ``form_dropdown()`` and ``form_multiselect()`` turn off automatic encoding of display values.
  - Added file and line number information to config file deprecation notices.

Version 3.4.1
-------------

Release Date: August 08, 2016

- Security

  - Improved XSS protection in the CP when searching.
  - Improved XSS protection in the CP's table filters.
  - Additional obscuring of file system paths when displaying exceptions.
  - Improved XSS protection in Markdown typography.

- Long filenames now wrap in their table views in the File Manager and picker.
- Fixed a bug where file modals were blank if no upload directories existed.
- Fixed an issue where the top and bottom buttons on the publish page did not match.
- Fixed an issue where changes to authentication rules could show a confusing form when logging in.
- Fixed a bug (#21931) where the datepicker did not work consistently with non-default date formats.
- Fixed a bug (#21950) where the ChannelSubscription model did not have the correct relationships.
- Fixed a bug (#21940) where some member groups could not see template groups they created.
- Fixed a bug (#21951) where the conditional parser removed too much whitespace.
- Fixed a bug (#21982) where template partials were not parsed when inside other template partials.
- Fixed a bug (#21981) where the "Show news on CP homepage" always showed "no" even when saved as "yes".
- Fixed a bug (#21983) where sometimes upload destinations didn't have their `{base_path}` parsed.
- Fixed a bug where when you edited a status the preview was always grey, instead of your specified color.
- Fixed a bug where non-Super Admins were not presented with a Site switcher in the control panel if there are exactly two Sites.
- Fixed a PHP warning that could occur when publishing an entry with admin email notifications enabled.
- Fixed a bug where add-ons ``require()``-ing native config files might throw a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#21944) where category fields were not available when editing categories on the publish page.
- Fixed a bug (#21864) on the member profile member list page where a MySQL error could occur when using some default sort orders.
- Fixed a bug (#21984) where a PHP error could occur when uploading avatars in the control panel.
- Fixed a bug (#21993) on the default HTML buttons settings page where the buttons were not limited to the current site.
- Fixed a bug (#21922) where there was no way to remove a selected file from a file field in the channel entry form.
- Fixed a bug (#21980) where a select field type would sometimes not validate when it should.
- Fixed a bug where duplicating a channel would carry over its `total_records` count.
- Fixed a bug where filling in a required File field on the publish form would not clear any associated validation error.
- Fixed a bug (#22010) where deleting rows with invalid cells in a Grid would not clear its validation error.

Version 3.4.0
-------------

Release Date: July 27, 2016

- Security (big thanks to security researchers at HackerOne for helping us continue to keep ExpressionEngine secure!):

  - Improved XSS and CSRF security in the Forum module.
  - Improved XSS security in the Member module.
  - Improved security by decoding IDN encoded domain names in user-submitted links.
  - Improved clickjacking defense by defaulting all requests to SAMEORIGIN framing rules. See the new :ref:`x_frame_options` config override for details and header options.

- Added a menu manager to create custom control panel menus.
- Added a "Maximum number of entries" setting to Channels.
- Added base URL and base path settings to the URL and Path Settings to make building URLs and paths easier when environments change.
- Added ``{reverse_count}`` and ``{absolute_reverse_count}`` variables to the Channel Entries tag, for displaying entry count "countdowns".
- Added an EllisLab news feed to the homepage.
- Added a permission to enable/disable the news on the CP homepage.
- Added a colorpicker to status highlight colors.
- Added live preview for status color picker.
- Added :ref:`system overrides <code_block_wrappers>` ``code_block_pre`` and ``code_block_post`` to give additional control over the output of ``[code]`` blocks.
- Added the ability to override the forum theme with a parameter: ``{exp:forum theme='my_theme'}``.
- When creating and editing Channel entries you now "Save" or "Save & Close" the form.
- Files have regained their ability to be categorized.
- Improved the UI for Template Routes
- The publish form will no longer have an empty category tab, unless you have a Layout that says it should.
- Switching sites in the CP will take you that site's homepage.
- The File Chooser for Textareas and the RTE injested some ginko biloba and will remember your filters while editing or creating an entry.
- Deprecation notices are back; Super Admins will see an alert in the "admin" sections of the CP.
- Improved search on the edit page. It now includes entry data along with titles.
- Improved template partial parsing time by a factor of ten.
- Simplified Profiler Performance tab, and broke out time spent accessing the database.
- Language packs saved using the translation utility are now saved in their respective `system/user/language` folder.
- Channel Sets now export and import category fields.
- Removed some items from the config for new installs. Existing installs can safely remove the following preferences if you're using their default values:

  - ``debug``: ``1``
  - ``is_system_on``: ``y``
  - ``allow_extensions``: ``y``
  - ``cache_driver``: ``file``
  - ``uri_protocol``: ``AUTO``
  - ``charset``: ``UTF-8``
  - ``subclass_prefix``: ``EE_``
  - ``log_threshold``: ``0``
  - ``log_date_format``: ``Y-m-d H:i:s``
  - ``rewrite_short_tags``: ``TRUE``

- **File Improvements**:

  - Gave parity between File field type and ``{exp:file:entries}`` variables.

    + :doc:`/fieldtypes/file` fields now have ``{directory_id}``, ``{directory_title}``, and ``{id_path=}``.
    + The :doc:`/add-ons/file/file_tag` now has ``{extension}``, ``{file_id}``, ``{file_name}``, ``{file_size}``, ``{mime_type}``, ``{modified_date}``, ``{path}``, ``{upload_date}``, and ``{url}``.

  - File size variables now have human readable modifiers.

    + ``{file_size}`` display bytes as always: ``295903``.
    + ``{file_size:human}`` displays an intelligently abbreviated size: ``289KB``.
    + ``{file_size:human_long}`` displays with the long form of the byte unit: ``289 kilobytes``.

- Fixed a bug where a File field tag may be unable to parse information about image manipulations for an upload directory belonging to another site.
- Fixed a bug (#21578) where a File field inside a Grid inside Channel Form would not have its data saved.
- Fixed a bug when saving a new Grid row that contained a Relationship field may show an error in rare cases.
- Fixed a bug (#21952) in the relationship field display where entries from other sites would not show up in the selectable options.
- Fixed a bug where radio buttons in sortable tables may lose their state after sorting.
- Fixed a bug (#21918) where parsing Grid fields from multiple content types could show errors in rare cases.
- Fixed a bug where `{cp_edit_entry_url}` did not specify the site ID.
- Fixed a bug where Channel Form would populate a DateTime object into the POST data for the `recent_comment_date` field.
- Fixed a bug where fields in a new layout tab could not be reordered until the layout was saved.
- Fixed a bug where Channel Sets only exported and imported the first Category Group of a Channel.
- Fixes a bug where MSM sites didn't always have the Default Status Group.
- Fixed a pagination bug on the Member Groups page.
- Fixed a bug where MSM site prefs might not be updated for all sites during updates.
- Fixed a bug (#21832) where apostrophes in checkbox, radio and select field values could cause validation errors when selecting those values in the publish form.

- Developers:

  - Added a `parse_config_variables()` global function for parsing `{base_url}` and `{base_path}` variables in strings.
  - Added a validation rule, `limitHtml`, for limiting the kinds of HTML tags allowed in a string.
  - Added a `placeholder` key to the field definition for text fields in the shared form view.
  - Added the ability to extend native config files.
  - Added a `cp_custom_menu` hook that allows you to create custom menu items. This replaces `cp_menu_array` from version 2.
  - Added a `search()` method to the model query builder for easy search implementations.
  - CP/Alerts without a title, body, and a sub-alert will no longer render.
  - Sweet new formatters, via the :doc:`Format Service </development/services/format>`. Currently includes attribute prepping and formatting byte sizes. More to come, huzzah!

Version 3.3.4
-------------

Release Date: July 7, 2016

- Security:

  - Fixed potential SQL and XSS injection vulnerabilities in the control panel.

- Added an .htaccess file to the themes folder to allow the control panel font assets to be used across domains and subdomains.
- Publish file modal search now matches the file manager search behavior, searching in file names, file titles and by mime type (addresses bug #21912).

- Fixed a PHP error when sending emails from extension hooks in the Session class.
- Fixed a SQL error introduced in 3.3.3 when using the ``orderby="random"`` parameter with the ``{exp:file:entries}`` tag.
- Fixed a PHP error introduced in 3.3.3 with the ``{exp:file:entries}`` tag in certain circumstances.
- Fixed a bug in the Discussion Forum that prevented errors from being thrown on some invalid post submissions.
- Fixed a PHP error when deleting a channel that contains entries that have comments.
- Fixed a bug (#21630) where multiple channel forms on the same page could result in unparsed variables.
- Fixed a bug (#21934) on non-default MSM sites, category custom field variables are unparsed on frontend.


- Developers:

  - Added a public `build_message()` method as an entrance point if needed within the `email_send` extension hook.



Version 3.3.3
-------------

Release Date: June 6, 2016

- Added back search to the file picker, addresses bug #21109.
- Improved SQL display in the application profiler.
- Fixed a bug where HTML could be rendered in the application profiler for expanded template log details.
- Fixed a bug where show/hide details link didn't work in the application profiler.
- Altered the member group defaults so that new member groups default to unlocked (see bug #21879).
- Fixed a bug (#21862) where the file picker modal may not be able to paginate in list view.
- Fixed a bug (#21873) where loading the member fields listing would load a different language key for the Member Groups sidebar link.
- Fixed a bug (#21890) where category assignments could be lost if the category field was not included in the form.
- Fixed a bug where using the `{exp:jquery:script_tag}` would generate a PHP exception.
- Fixed a bug where deleting a member and reassigning their content missed their versioned Channel entries.
- Fixed a bug (#21692) where the channel filter search on the Entry Manger would sometimes not work.
- Fixed a bug (#21783) where HTML buttons had blank previews when they contained HTML entities.
- Fixed a bug (#21735) channel form entries didn't update the edit date.
- Fixed a bug (#21899) where channel form would ignore custom inline error tags.
- Fixed a bug (#21784) where a PHP error would be shown when going to an edit entry page without an entry_id.
- Fixed a bug (#21391) where New Relic would not be displayed as enabled when it was enabled by default.
- Fixed a bug (#21485) where text fields with numeric content types would throw exceptions when saving with an empty value.
- Fixed a bug where private messages wouldn't show up in the member portal.
- Fixed a bug (#21535) where there was as missing image for the front-end member templates.
- Fixed a bug (#21851) on sites using MSM where templates from one site could be erroneously copied over to all other sites.
- Fixed a bug (#21583) where a PHP error could occur in the channel form when specifying an invalid entry_id to edit.
- Fixed a bug (#21800) where setting a default template group for a new MSM site unset the default templates on all other sites.
- Fixed a bug where a PHP error could occur on the control panel member profile page when not on the default site.
- Fixed a bug (#21840) where the user language setting did not override the default language setting.
- Fixed a bug (#21861) in frontend member registration where a MySQL occurred if there were custom member fields included on the form.
- Fixed a bug where a blank status highlight color could cause an exception on the content edit page.
- Fixed a bug (#21421) where index.html, index.php, and index.htm would accidentally be synced to a file upload directory.
- Fixed a bug (#21424) where category fields were not using the appropriate field formatting (since it was never set).
- Fixed a bug where you couldn't update the field formatting for a category field for all existing categories.
- Fixed a bug (#21877) in the 3.1.0 updater that was reaching outside of the database prefix to try to change some tables.
- Fixed a bug where updating your software license file would not be immediately reflected on your EllisLab.com Manage Purchases page.
- Fixed a bug where Developer Log items made at the same second might be sorted randomly by MySQL.
- Fixed a bug where Template Partial and Variable updated from the control panel were not reflected in the file system.
- Fixed a bug in the XML-RPC Server implementation that could cause XML parsing failures on newer versions of PHP.


Version 3.3.2
-------------

Release Date: May 20, 2016

- Saving entry revisions is now automatic so we removed the "Save Revision" button.
- Updated Date formatting variables to allow day of the week, ISO-8601 year number, timezone identifier, ISO-8601 date, and microseconds. See :doc:`/templates/date_variable_formatting` for details.
- Optimized the create and edit template page to reduce the number of queries needed.
- Fixed a bug (#21227) where the images in the RTE did not have the proper overlay when hovering over them.
- Fixed a bug (#21288) where you may not be able to reliably paste text into an RTE field that had an image in it.
- Fixed a bug (#21870) where the Simple Commerce and Pages modules were missing a link to their settings.
- Fixed a bug where ``EXPLAIN`` queries could not be run in the SQL manager.
- Fixed a bug where relationship data was not deleted completely.
- Fixed a model bug where pivot table relationships were not always reversed correctly.
- Fixed a bug (#21443) where assigning Allowed Channels with MSM would cause other sites to lose their assignments.
- Fixed a bug where checking the Mime Type of a CSS file could return ``"text/plain"`` instead of ``"text/css"``.
- Fixed a bug (#21663) where a raw language string would be returned if an add-on fails to install.
- Fixed a bug (#21731) where status permissions were not being respected.
- Fixed a bug (#21749) where a member group with only edit entry permissions did not have the Edit nav menu.
- Fixed a bug (#21797) where we provided edit and delete icons for categories and then denied access when you tried to use them. Sorry.
- Fixed a bug where add-ons could not specify a settings icon in the header.
- Fixed a bug (#21866) where Markdown ``[code]`` blocks were not rendering correctly.
- Fixed a bug where the default theme could not be installed.
- Fixed a bug where the category parameter on the default theme slideshow could cause an error on some servers.
- Fixed a bug where URLs in an add-on's README.md file would not mask the CP url.
- Fixed a bug where Channel ``{total_entries}`` was not updated when publishing a new entry.
- Fixed a bug where Channel ``{total_entries}`` was not updated by the Statistics sync utility.
- Fixed a bug where disabled checkboxes sorta looked enabley.
- Fixed a bug where settings were not passed to Extension constructors on the Extensions settings page.
- Fixed a bug (#21860) where update 3.1.0 could throw a PHP error in some situations.

Version 3.3.1
-------------

Release Date: May 10th, 2016

- **NEW**: Added additional logging when changing email address and password.
- Eliminated some extra, duplicate, and redundant queries when editing templates that are saved as files.
- Fixed a security bug where logged out users could be shown altered system messages.
- Fixed a bug (#21426) where status colors were not correctly shown on the Edit page.
- Fixed a bug (#21712) where the toggle fieldtype sometimes generated an error when used in Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug (#21713) where the file field on a publish form wouldn't let go of an old file name when you replaced it. Let it go.
- Fixed a bug (#21775) in the Moblog module where PHP errors could occur when saving an edited moblog and multiple allowed emails were specified.
- Fixed a bug (#21806) where the Channel Form would inadvertently remove embed tags when editing entries.
- Fixed a bug (#21808) when using formatting types other than Markdown that effectively ignored a Channel's "Render URLs and Email addresses as links?" setting.
- Fixed a bug (#21813) where an PHP error may show when viewing a member profile on older versions of PHP.
- Fixed a bug (#21816) where there was an unrendered language key in the Simple Commerce email templates listing.
- Fixed a bug (#21819) where the new Channel entry notifications were not working.
- Fixed a bug (#21820) where an unordered HTML button proudly declared itself instead of just using its icon.
- Fixed a bug (#21821) where email templates felt there were perfect as-is and didn't save any edits.
- Fixed a bug (#21824) where dates could display improperly on the Publish and Edit pages.
- Fixed a bug (#21825) with Channel Set exports where exporting some field types could result in a corrupted zip file.
- Fixed a bug (#21833) where the Active Record class may show an error in PHP 7.
- Fixed a bug where a PHP error could occur when uploading files to a file field with a single directory specified.
- Fixed a bug where adding a new row to a grid wouldn't register any file upload buttons for textareas.
- Fixed a bug where moblog settings did not properly display selected categories.
- Fixed a bug where some relationship fields on the publish form would not scroll.
- Fixed an obscure bug in channel entries where a specifying an invalid month, day and/or year in the parameters or the URI caused a MySQL error.

Version 3.3.0
-------------

Release Date: April 19, 2016

- **NEW**: Added :doc:`Channel Sets </channel/sets>`.
- **NEW**: Added the default theme.
- **NEW**: Added the ability to add language information to a bbcode block (e.g. ``[code="php"]``).
- **NEW**: ``{logged_in_...}`` :ref:`Member variables <member_variables>` are now parsed early.
- **NEW**: Super Admins using "Login as" retain debugging information.
- **NEW**: Member localization will now "stick" with the site's preferences unless they have specified localization settings for their own account.
- **NEW**: Added FontAwesome to the Control Panel.
- **NEW**: Added a ``{site_description}`` global variable.
- **NEW**: Added an unordered list button to the predefined HTML buttons.
- **NEW**: Comments column on control panel entries listing will not show if comments are disabled and no comments are present on the site.
- **NEW**: Added variables to the following email templates:

  - 'User - Account declined notification' (``{username}``)
  - 'User - Account validation notification' (``{username}``, ``{email}``)

- The RTE fieldtype no longer manipulates the HTML it generates. What you save is what you get.
- Changed the email setting's SMTP password field and the moblog setting's email account password fields from plain text to password fields.
- Linked category group and field group names in the control panel now link to their respective category and field listings.
- Optimized relationship parent tag query.
- Updated `PHP Markdown <https://michelf.ca/projects/php-markdown/>`_ to 1.6.0.
- Removed code highlighting in ``[code]`` blocks.
- Removed Glyphicons from the Control Panel.
- Fixed a bug (#21697) where an error may show when an exception is thrown in PHP 7.
- Fixed a bug (#21696) where the Manage Categories toggle was unstyled.
- Fixed a bug (#21667) where the image formatting button on a textarea did not use the file picker.
- Fixed a bug (#21688) where validation errors set via AJAX on Grid fields would sometimes be unresolvable.
- Fixed a bug where channel form could sometimes overwrite fields that were not in the form.
- Fixed a bug (#21644) where the file manager did not load for users with a lot of files.
- Fixed a bug where grid with more than one relationship could not parse all of them.
- Fixed a bug where the RTE fieldtype wasn't always installed.
- Fixed a bug (#21582) where layouts missing the Categories tab would generate errors on the publish page.
- Fixed a bug (#21733) where layouts missing the Publish tab would generate errors on the publish page.
- Fixed a bug (#21677) where recalcuatling statistics didn't recalculate the comment counts.
- Fixed a bug (#21682) where the list for duplicating an existing template, when creating a new template, was unsorted.
- Fixed a bug (#21704) where Firefox wouldn't scroll to top in the CP.
- Fixed a bug (#21705) where saving an entry could trigger a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#21710) where the file modal's table did not sort.
- Fixed a bug (#21619) where ``[code]`` blocks and Markdown codeblocks did not properly add ``<pre>`` tags.
- Fixed a bug where the Channel Form would inadvertently remove add-on tags when editing entries.
- Fixed a MySQL error that would occur on invalid forum feed requests.
- Fixed a stray PHP 7 incompatibility in Channel Form
- Fixed a bug (#21711) where CSS assets were not being delivered in ``{path='css/_ee_channel_form_css'}`` requests.
- Fixed a bug where ``layout:`` globals were parsed in content.
- Fixed a bug in site settings where the HTML button form required a closing tag.
- Fixed a bug (#21699) where a PHP error occurred when editing an entry via the channel form if the instructions or label tags were present.
- Fixed a bug (#21671) where a 'Disallowed Key Characters' error occurred when saving the channel_lang.php translation file.
- Fixed a bug (#21700) where a PHP error occurred on the member group page in the control panel when pagination was present.
- Fixed a bug (#21755) where there were unused language keys.
- Fixed a few bugs (#21756, #21757, #21758, #21761, #21760, #21762, #21759, #21774) with duplicate language keys.
- Fixed a bug (#21765) where some language keys had grammar issues.
- Fixed a few bugs (#21766, #21767) where we weren't using language keys.
- Fixed a bug (#21768) where HTML button names were not being translated.
- Fixed a bug (#21769) where we had a small typo in new member notifications language.
- Fixed a bug (#21770) where a language key wasn't getting the proper substitution.
- Fixed a bug (#21771) where a language key wasn't in our language files.
- Fixed some langauge string bugs (#21754 and #21753).
- Fixed a bug (#21707) where some old auto saved entries refused to go away.
- Fixed a bug (#21750) where the File field could show an undefined index error if its data wasn't pre-cached.
- Fixed a bug where the default CP homepage could not be saved for members other than the logged-in member.
- Fixed a bug (#21683) where URL titles had to be unique site-wide instead of per-Channel.
- Fixed a number of display bugs (#21671) in the translator.
- Fixed a MySQL error when recounting statistics and the Forum was installed (#21780).
- Fixed a bug where the comment form could show despite comments being globally disabled.
- Fixed a bug on the member profile page where the link to the member group form did not show for superadmins.
- Reduced the password reset token's timeout. (thanks to security researcher |sjibe_kanti|)

.. |sjibe_kanti| raw:: html

  <a class="reference external" href="https://twitter.com/Sajibekantibd" rel="nofollow">Sjibe Kanti</a>

- Developers:

  - **NEW**: Added ``relationships_display_field_options`` hook to allow additional filters on the options in the publish field.
  - **NEW**: Added extension hooks for CategoryField, CategoryGroup, ChannelField, ChannelFieldGroup, File, MemberField, MemberGroup, Template, TemplateGroup, TemplateRoute models.



Version 3.2.1
-------------

Release Date: March 16, 2016

- Fixed a bug (#21679) where the file field could lose content when saving existing entries.
- Fixed a bug where apostrophes were not escaped in the Translation Utility.
- Fixed a bug where entries without authors would generate a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug where using channel form with a channel that has no channel form settings would generate PHP errors.
- Fixed a bug (#20554) where the RTE stored full URLs instead of ``{filedir_n}`` tags.
- Fixed a bug where usage of ``CI_DB_active_rec::distinct()`` would cause an exception.
- Fixed bugs (#21544, #21353) with uploading and assigning avatars.

- Developers:

  - Added member_ids to ``cp_members_validate_members`` hook.

Version 3.2.0
-------------

Release Date: March 8, 2016

- **NEW:** Added template tags for modified image file dimensions i.e. ``{image}{width:small}{/image}``.
- **NEW:** Added a Toggle Fieldtype for all your on/off and yes/no needs.
- **NEW:** Added URL Field Type
- **NEW:** Added Email Address Field Type
- The default database engine is now InnoDB
- Added Forum Aliases.
- Added the Forum Publish Tab back in.
- Added global template variable/conditional ``is_ajax_request``
- Yay: we deprecated the jQuery module! Boo: we made it installable so you can still use it. Really, just use their CDN and include it yourself.
- Added a notice to the Site Manager when the site limit has been reached.
- Changed the file display to use the file's name for non-images instead of the missing image thumbnail. (Bug #21270)
- Changed the behavior of the "Any ..." options in the Relationship settings such that it and the specific options are mutually exclusive, i.e. "Any channel" or a specific channel, but not both. (Bug #21659)
- Fixed a bug (#21250) where sidebar items could not be marked inactive. Now they can.
- Fixed a bug where the Core version tried to use the Spam service.
- Fixed a bug where the comment module could throw a PHP error for guest posts.
- Fixed a bug (#21650) where one could not remove all rows in a Grid field.
- Fixed a bug (#21647) where there could be an undefined variable error on the Publish screen.
- Fixed a bug (#21628) where categories would not maintain their selection on the Publish form when there was a validation error.
- Fixed a bug (#21626) where the path for the passwords dictionary file was pointing to the wrong location.
- Fixed a bug where formatting buttons on textareas would not work on new Grid rows.
- Fixed a bug (#21638) where textareas with a file chooser available would have non-images inserted as an image tag.
- Fixed a bug (#21567) where sites with OPcache enabled can result in a false erorr after a fresh install.
- Fixed a bug (#21555) where empty tabs could not be removed from a layout.
- Fixed a bug (#21545) where email templates could not be edited.
- Fixed a bug (#21655) where template versions could sometimes generate erorrs.
- Fixed a bug (#21656) where Template Revisions were displayed unsorted, rather than sorted by date.
- Fixed a bug (#21565) where channel field text formatting could not update existing entries.
- Fixed a bug (#21103) where installing from https would configure the site for http instead of https.
- Fixed a bug (#21187) where Channel Form would sometimes be a little too strict about required fields.
- Fixed a bug (#21215) where updating a site with template routes from a version before 2.9.3 would generate errors.
- Fixed a bug (#21651) where we had a spelling mistake in an language key.
- Fixed a bug (#21561) where the translation utitliy would truncate some HTML when saving.
- Fixed a bug (#21293) where the translation utility would break the form if the translation contained a quotation mark.
- Fixed a bug (#21648) where the last field in a layout would sometimes refuse to move.
- Fixed a bug (#21587) where removing custom fields that were in a layout could break the layout.
- Fixed a bug (#21487) where enabling versioning after creating a layout would generate errors.
- Fixed a bug (#21329) where sending HTML email via the Communicate utility could add non breaking spaces.
- Fixed a bug (#21318) where partial translations could not be saved.
- Fixed a bug (#21335) where channel form couldn't tell if an option was checked or not.
- Fixed a bug where Grid column clones were jealous and quietly assumed the identity of the original.
- Fixed a bug where you could not erase the contents of RTE field once it had been saved.
- Fixed a bug where commenting as a Guest generated an error.
- Fixed a bug (#21577) where the RTE would grow when switching from WYSIWYG to Source View.
- Fixed a bug where the front-end email settings page didn't require a password when you weren't changing your email address.
- Fixed a bug (#21287) where RTE fields could not be resized.
- Fixed a bug where database errors could sometimes not be displayed.
- Fixed a bug (#21601) where extension settings were only saved to the first method in the database.
- Fixed a bug (#21599) where the no_results conditional on nested relationship tags would have some of the initial characters cut off.
- Fixed a bug (#21584) where you couldn't properly duplicate the Super Admin member group.
- Fixed a bug (#21627) where the comment form didn't work when using Session or Session and Cookie front-end session types.


- Developers:

  - Added `output_show_message` hook for modifying the output of front-end system messages.
  - Added an ``$antipool`` parameter to ``random_string()`` in the string helper, to blacklist characters from the alphanumeric-type pools. Uses are for unambiguous strings for humans, i.e. order numbers, coupon codes, etc: ``$secret_code = strtoupper(random_string('alnum', 8, '0OoDd1IiLl8Bb5Ss2Zz'));``
  - The `cp_search_index` table was removed.
  - The VariableColumnModel no longer marks properties as dirty when filling.

Version 3.1.4
-------------

Release Date: February 26, 2016

- Fixed a **CRITICAL** bug where saving or deleting comments may cause data loss in certain areas of the associated Channel entries, caused by a change in 3.1.3. Only installations of 3.1.3 were affected.

Version 3.1.3
-------------

Release Date: February 25, 2016

- Added visual indicators to required grid columns.
- Grid's data type options now use the same names as the custom field's type options.
- When editing a grid column's data type the options are now filtered based on field type compatibility.
- Member listing setting "Sort By" choices now match available columns.
- Made some parameters in some Active Record methods required.
- Our CodeMirror linter had an epiphany and now realizes that installed plugins can have underscores in their tag names.
- Tweaked Performance tab of the Profiler for clearer display.
- Fixed a bug (#21457) where unchecked checkboxes in a publish form didn't stay unchecked.
- Fixed a bug (#21558) where some Pages module variables were empty (and potentially some other items if retrieved with ``config_item()``).
- Fixed a bug (#21566) where the `beforeSort` and `afterSort` Grid publish form events were not working.
- Fixed a bug (#21569) where categories of the same name thought they were all selected when only some of them were.
- Fixed a bug (#21581) where a MySQL error occured on the publish page if no member groups were included in the author list.
- Fixed a bug (#21593) where a front-end logout link may show a warning in PHP 7.
- Fixed a bug (#21594) where `number` input types were not bound to AJAX form validation and had no styling.
- Fixed a bug (#21595) where categories created under another MSM site could not be assigned to an entry.
- Fixed a bug (#21603) where Grid's JavaScript may try to manipulate table elements that are part of custom fieldtype markup.
- Fixed a bug (#21604) where relationships inside grid fields did not work consistently on MSM sites.
- Fixed a bug (#21605) where the documentation link for the "Suspend threshold" setting was broken.
- Fixed a bug (#21606) where the units used for the Lockout Time setting were not specified in the field description.
- Fixed a bug (#21609) where errors may appear when downloading a new blacklist under PHP 7.
- Fixed bugs (#21612 & #21616) where entry comment counts where not updated when adding or deleting comments.
- Fixed a bug (#21614) where one could not delete the last image manipulation for an upload directory.
- Fixed a bug (#21615) where there were a few misspellings of "entries" in the CP.
- Fixed a bug where Relationship fields could not be filtered when using session IDs for control panel sessions.
- Fixed a bug where the header search box did not repopulate correctly.
- Fixed a bug where a control panel search in the channel section could throw a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug where some default avatars were no longer displayed on the frontend.
- Fixed a bug where accepting the core file change notice resulted in a 404.
- Fixed a bug where custom fields could use reserved words as their short name.
- Fixed a bug where a Super Admin could delete his/her own account.
- Fixed a bug where installing an add-on with a publish tab would break existing publish form layouts.
- Fixed a bug where under the right conditions a member group that should have permissions to a forum doesn't.
- Fixed a bug where `glob()` could return `FALSE` and cause all manner of errors in the Add-On Manager.
- Fixed a bug where saving a template did not clear any of the caches.
- Fixed a bug where the Revisions tab on the publish entry form only showed two versions instead of all your versions.
- Fixed a bug where the profiler did not display the URI of the current page call.
- Fixed a bug on the Superadmin group edit page, where the checkboxes for including in the author list and member list were incorrect.
- Fixed a bug where the confirmation notice would not be shown after deleting a large number of entries.

Version 3.1.2
-------------

Release Date: January 28, 2016

- Fixed a bug (#21408) where the Show File Chooser checkbox would not save for text input fields.
- Fixed a bug (#21488) where updating your member password could result in a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#21493) where a "more info" link in the Security & Privacy settings 404d.
- Fixed a bug (#21498) where using `dynamic_parameters` resulted in a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#21505) where the template creation form would not have its submit buttons re-enabled after a validation error.
- Fixed a bug (#21508) where form validation messages were not presented properly when editing a member's profile.
- Fixed a bug (#21515) where the file upload modal didn't work when opened from the Rich Text Editor or the Textarea fields.
- Fixed a bug (#21520) where the installer did not use the system config override for theme URL.
- Fixed a bug (#21521) where extension settings were not wrapped in the proper markup.
- Fixed a bug (#21523) where member groups listing in channel layouts table was missing a space.
- Fixed a bug (#21526) where an error would appear when saving a category field.
- Fixed a bug (#21532) where accessing some files wrongly accused you of attempting to access files outside of a directory.
- Fixed a bug (#21537) where PHP 5.3 didn't like something the Pages module was doing and complained loudly.
- Fixed a bug (#21546) where one could not delete more than one category at a time via the category manager.
- Fixed a bug where the moblog settings page could run out of memory on large sites.
- Fixed a bug where `upload_directory` config overrides weren't overriding on error display in the File Manager
- Fixed a bug where relationship parsing could result in conditional errors.
- Fixed a bug where channel form did not work without a url title field.
- Fixed a bug in channel form where the validation parameters could be ignored.
- Fixed a bug where deleting a field group didn't delete its fields.
- Fixed a bug where Site filters never showed.
- Fixed a bug where uploading an avatar could result in an error about unlinking a directory.
- Fixed a bug where the installer incorrectly showed errors when moving avatars.
- Fixed a bug in the Channel form where non-superadmins did not always have access to all of their allowed channels.
- Added a warning to the File Manager when the upload directory you are browsing at is not on the file system.

Version 3.1.1
-------------

Release Date: January 20, 2016

- Fixed a bug (#21460) where interacting with a Relationship field's filter inside a new Grid row would cause an error on entry save.
- Fixed a bug where the contact form could throw a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#21507) where creating template groups with save as files would throw PHP errors.
- Fixed a bug (#21512) where using the filepicker in the publish form could result in an "Invalid selection" error.
- Fixed a bug where the filepicker for file fields forgot about the default modal view setting.
- Fixed a bug (#21511) where the status filter on the Entry Manager ignored your selected channel.
- Fixed a bug where Template Variables would not automatically sync from files.
- Fixed a bug where the Metaweblog API errored when attempting to send or receive data.

Version 3.1.0
-------------

Release Date: January 18, 2016

- Compatible with PHP 7 and MySQL 5.7
- Template partials and Template variables can now be saved as files.
- Added the ability to manage categories from the Channel entry publish form.
- CodeMirror textareas (think Templates) are now resizable.
- Channel entries now default sort by entry date with the newest at the top.
- New member groups default to allowing online website access.
- Updated language in the installer to identify the directory that needs to be deleted if we can't automatically rename the installer directory.
- Template groups can be reordered in the sidebar again.
- Removed duplicate queries when displaying multiple relationship fields on the publish form.
- Changed File listing to sort by date by default.
- Changed Add-on listings so the add-on name always links to the module control panel or settings if they exist.
- Changed wording of File field button on Publish page.
- Fixed a bug where the Filepicker could run out of memory.
- Fixed a bug where ``load_package_js`` did not work on fieldtype publish pages.
- Fixed a bug where validation did not work consistently on some numeric types.
- Fixed a bug (#21255) where the "Assign category parents?" setting had no effect.
- Fixed a bug where the JavaScript for the Rich Tech Editor could not be loaded on the front-end.
- Fixed a bug (#21118) where custom member fields could not be populated.
- Fixed a bug (#21309) where custom member fields could not be rendered in a template.
- Fixed a bug where a PHP error would appear in the control panel if the `cp_css_end` hook was active.
- Fixed a bug where using the `logged_out_member_id=` parameter on Channel Form would throw an exception for logged-out users.
- Fixed a bug where duplicating a template group would not reset the hit counts for those templates or copy template permissions.
- Fixed a bug where new installs may be tracking template hits despite the setting appearing disabled.
- Fixed a bug (#21157) where files sizes could not be less than 1MB.
- Fixed a bug where bulk action checkboxes failed to work in the Entry Manager after searching.
- Fixed a bug (#21104) where add-ons with mutliple fieldtypes couldn't use their fieldtypes.
- Fixed a bug where the installer wouldn't automatically rename if you still had the mailing list export in your cache.
- Fixed a bug (#21458) where file uploads did not work in the Channel form.
- Fixed a bug (#21442) in the Channel form where PHP errors occurred when editing an entry with a file.
- Fixed a bug in the Channel form where PHP errors could occur when submitting an entry with no category assigned.
- Fixed a bug where CAPTCHA was not working properly on the Channel form.
- Fixed a bug where ENTRY_ID was not properly replaced on return after submitting the Channel form.
- Fixed a bug where the default status was not being used by the Channel form.
- Fixed a bug where new sites could not be created via the Site Manager.
- Fixed a bug (#21491) where the Grid model's cache could not be cleared on subsequent data queries.
- Fixed a bug (#21464) where removing a file didn't remove it's manipulated copies. It's hard saying good-bye.
- Fixed a bug (#21482) where templates were jealous and refused to show you their previous revisions.
- Fixed a bug (#21472) where checkboxes, radio buttons, and multiselect fieldtypes didn't pay attention when given their menu options on create.
- Fixed a bug where adding category groups to a channel that had a layout wouldn't let you move that category group in the layout.
- Fixed a bug (#21490) where "Populate the menu from another channel field" option in Channel Fields forgot which field you wanted to use.
- Fixed some language keys.
- Fixed a PHP warning when editing the Developer Forum theme templates.
- Fixed a bug where a duplicated Grid column would create two copies when duplicated.
- Fixed a Markdown bug with URLs that contain spaces when using Safe HTML.
- Fixed a bug (#21462) for PHP 5.3 which would lead to a fatal ``Using $this when not in object context...`` error. Time to upgrade PHP!
- Fixed a bug where stop word removal in the search module was not UTF-8 compatible. Zaro Aa is no longer Zaro .
- Fixed an obscure URI detection bug that could lead to duplicate content duplicate content.
- Fixed a bug in Template Routes where it was ignoring the "Require all Segments" setting.
- Renamed Template Route's "Require all Segments" setting to "Require all Variables" to match its behavior.

- Developers:

  - Changed the event emitter to trigger subscriber events before manually bound ones
  - Model events will no longer trigger if the described event does not take place (no ``onAfterSave`` if save is called on an unchanged model)
  - Added ``less_than`` and ``greater_than`` validation rules
  - ``string_override`` key in publish form tab definitions works again.
  - Fixed a bug where asking a model query to return columns that didn't include the primary key would only return one result.
  - Class names can now be set on fieldsets via the shared form attributes array.
  - Fixed a bug in the legacy Addons library where incorrect paths would be returned from the `get_installed()` method.
  - Fixed a bug where alerts that were deferred would not carry over their manually-set close/cannot close setting.
  - Date fields with the date picker bound to them can set a custom date format via a `data-date-format` parameter on the text input.
  - The date picker can be bound to a text input using `EE.cp.datePicker.bind(element)`.
  - Added `comment_entries_query_result` hook for modifying the query result set for `{exp:comment:entries}`.
  - Added `comment_entries_comment_ids_query` hook for modifying the query that selects the IDs for comments to display in `{exp:comment:entries}`.
  - Added the ability for Folder List sidebars to be reordered.
  - Added a pause and resume method to the form validation JS.
  - Added: Channel Fields can now declare their compatibility type allowing editing of the type itself (i.e. RTE to Textarea).
  - Added a number of hooks to the following models:

    - Channel Entry
    - Member
    - Category
    - Comment

Version 3.0.6
-------------

Release Date: December 17, 2015

- Fixed a bug (#21240) where some templates rendered with errors relating to "protect_javascript".
- Fixed a bug (#21310) where Channel Layouts did not allow you to reposition fields that were added after the layout was created.
- Fixed a bug (#21400) where the Contact Form generated errors.
- Fixed a bug (#21400) where the Contact Form returned a white screen when the Spam module was enabled.
- Fixed a bug (#21412) where some categories appeared on the Publish tab.
- Fixed a bug (#21420) where the Relationship field could no longer organize its related items after searching.
- Fixed a bug (#21436) where RTEs were named inconsistently as fields vs. Grid columns.
- Fixed a bug where some elseif branches in template conditionals were not pruned correctly.
- Fixed a bug where searching withing a Relationship field would unsort your related entries.
- Fixed a bug where publish forms with large Relationship fields could overflow the POST data and result in data loss.
- Fixed a bug where new rows added to a Grid with a Relationship column could have pre-populated Relationship fields.
- Fixed a bug where filtering or searching a Relationship inside a Grid caused that Relationship to ignore the selection.
- Fixed a bug with some overzealous Markdown parsing.
- Fixed a bug where the Member module would not be installed when upgrading a Core installation to Standard.
- Fixed the ``{cp_edit_entry_url}`` variable.
- Fixed a bug where forum previews did not fall back to using the default index template if running the forums through the templates.
- Adjusted sub menus to scroll when they are long.
- Improved New Relic transaction reporting.
- Pre-release versions now include a visual indication that they're pre-release and also include the version identifier (e.g. ``dp.4``) in the extended version information.
- The installer has been calmed down a bit and won't skip showing you error messages when they exist.
- Added a check for the required PHP Fileinfo extension to the installer.
- Added a feature (#21418): duplicating a Template did not duplicate its allowed member groups.
- Added a feature (#21427): the Edit Manager's category filter is now populated based on the channel filter.
- Added a feature: comments can be formatted with any formatter you have installed. EE, we have Markdown!

Version 3.0.5
-------------

Release Date: December 2, 2015

- Fixed a bug (#21338) where categories with an ampersand in the title would not maintain its selection state on the entry publish form.
- Fixed a bug (#21300) where the RTE's image tool may place the selected image in another RTE when there are multiple on a publish form.
- Fixed a bug where a PHP error would appear in the control panel if the ``cp_css_end`` hook was active.
- Fixed a bug where some Channel entry date variables would not work in conditionals without having brackets around them.
- Fixed a bug (#21378) where the ``cp_css_end`` hook was never fired.
- Fixed a bug (#21394) where an incorrect language key was used for the working state of some buttons in the Members section.
- Fixed a bug (#21395) where a PHP error may appear on some actions dealing with file thumbnails.
- Fixed a bug (#21389) where some OGV files would not be accepted for upload.
- Fixed a bug (#21388) where validation for URL titles in Channel entries would incorrectly flag periods as not allowed.
- Fixed a bug where global template partials could not be edited.
- Fixed a bug where saving entries did not clear caches if that setting was enabled.
- Fixed a bug where the default homepage could be set to the publish page of no channel.
- Fixed a bug where only super admins could edit status groups.
- Fixed a bug where form success messages were removed too eagerly.
- Fixed a bug where modals were shy and did not scroll into view when using Firefox.
- Fixed a bug (#21380) where logging in as another member from the control panel would show a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug where channel layouts did not play nicely with the profiler.
- Fixed a bug (#21387, #21273) where the File module was not installed.
- Fixed a bug (#21373) where two file fields in one Channel would not work on the Publish page.
- Fixed a bug (#21344) where the file modal would not restrict you to the allowed directory when switching filters.
- Fixing a bug where no notice was shown when deleting a newly created publish layout tab with a field in it.
- Fixed a bug (#21406) where the "view" link in the CP for your MSM site did not open in a new tab.
- Fixed a bug (#21407) where extending the Category class revealed a PHP Runtime error.
- Fixed a bug (#21342) where CSV exports were really Comma-and-Space Separated Values.

Version 3.0.4
-------------

Release Date: November 18, 2015

- Fixed a bug that allowed `.codemirror` to stand on top of `.sub-menu`
- Fixed a bug that prevented grid column widths from affecting the publish UI. (note: column widths will not affect grid columns with RTE, Relationships or Textarea fields)
- Fixed a bug where run-on sentences made the RTE puff up with pride inside grid fields, we pulled him aside and set him straight.
- Fixed a bug (#21099) where line breaks in member signatures were being converted to literal ``\n``. Literally.
- Fixed a bug (#21282) where publish tabs pulled a bait and switch and saved their defaults instead of your data. They are looking at hours of community service.
- Fixed a bug (#21289) where some JavaScript events didn't happen.
- Fixed a bug (#21295) where clicking, instead of dragging, on the move icon in Channel Layouts refreshed the page.
- Fixed a bug (#21305) where the button text on a Channel entry publish form would not be reset after a validation error when revisions were enabled.
- Fixed a bug (#21307) where LocalPath::__get generated PHP errors.
- Fixed a bug (#21308) where listing member groups couldn't handle large numbers of members.
- Fixed a bug (#21313) where submitting forms or clicking links would occasionally result in a blank page.
- Fixed a bug (#21320) where a PHP error would appear when using the `{member_search_path}` variable inside an Channel Entries tag pair.
- Fixed a bug (#21321) where empty relationship fields sometimes generated errors. Sometimes you just need a little alone time.
- Fixed a bug (#21325) where certain add-ons refused to acknowledge their new version number after they were updated.
- Fixed a bug (#21326) where the template manager was insensitive toward case sensitive file systems and you could not edit Forum Templates.
- Fixed a bug (#21328) where we still referenced the constant SYSTEM. It's now SYSPATH.
- Fixed a bug (#21332) where some template paths had double slashes (//) when saving as files.
- Fixed a bug (#21334) where template groups which were not the default template group bullied the default template group into renouncing its defaultness.
- Fixed a bug where categories could not be assigned via Channel Form.
- Fixed a bug where you couldn't Communicate if you had a large number of members.
- Fixed a bug where the CP complained with esoteric errors when you had enough members for pagination.
- Fixed a bug where membership was elitist and pending members could not be approved.
- Fixed a bug where the Forums fibbed about the Upload Directory being a URL when really it's a path.
- Fixed a bug where removing the Forum theme named "default" prevented the Template Manager from finding any Forum themes.
- Fixed a bug where some buttons were roguishly displaying a raw language key, rather than actual language data.
- Fixed a bug (#21283) where upload directory synchronization may not apply image manipulations to some files.
- Fixed a bug (#21259) in the Email mdoule where PHP errors were thrown after sending emails.
- Fixed a bug (#21274) where a member group with file access couldn't open the file picker.
- Fixed a bug where avatar images where showing up in the file picker.
- Fixed a bug where you couldn't upload images if the file picker only had one directory to choose from.
- Added site-wide yes/no settings for notifying pending members when they are approved or denied.

Version 3.0.3
-------------

Release Date: November 9, 2015

- Fixed a bug (#21272) where default field formatting was not respected when publishing. Chastised the offending code.
- Fixed a bug (#21286) where there was a syntax error in the file picker on lower versions of PHP.
- Fixed a bug (#21296) where new templates were shy and wouldn't let anyone but Super Admins view them.
- Fixed a bug (#21299) where a Grid-compatible fieldtype whose markup contained a table would make the Grid field behave incorrectly.
- Fixed a bug (#21301) where there was only one default template group per install, not per site.
- Fixed a bug (#21314) where the Discussion Forum front end was 404'ing. Where did it go?
- Fixed a bug with Discussion Forum theme image URLs
- Fixed a bug where some site settings did not save correctly.
- Added the SMTP port to the Outgoing Email settings page.

Version 3.0.2
-------------

Release Date: November 2, 2015

- Fixed a bug (#21214) where ExpressionEngine Core had Phantom Template Routes Syndrome which was causing PHP errors.
- Fixed a bug (#21217) where the "owned by" link in the License & Registration page resulted in a 404.
- Fixed a bug (#21222) where the CP was referencing "default.png" which retired and is on vacation in the south of France.
- Fixed a bug (#21223) where clicking on the sort handle in grid settings refreshed the page.
- Fixed a bug (#21225) where editing an entry with a file in a grid column could result in a PHP error.
- Fixed a bug (#21226) where field groups refused to be assigned to any site but your first one.
- Fixed a bug (#21228) where files could be uploaded to any upload destination via the publish form.
- Fixed a bug (#21236) where the Black/White List add-on generated errors when trying to download the EE Blacklist.
- Fixed a bug (#21239) where the IP to Nation add-on wouldn't let you unban all countries once you'd banned at least one.
- Fixed a bug (#21244 & #21198 & #21193) where field settings had a case of amnesia.
- Fixed a bug (#21248) where choosing a thumbnail in the filepicker did nothing.
- Fixed a bug (#21249) where the path of saved translations was incorrect.
- Fixed a bug (#21251) where creating an entry didn't set an `edit_date`.
- Fixed a bug (#21252) where adding a custom member field could result in an exception.
- Fixed a bug (#21253) where `{edit_date}` formatted dates incorrectly.
- Fixed a bug (#21264) where updating a member would sometimes cause PHP notices.
- Fixed a bug (#21266) where new channel entries ignored the Channel Settings for default status, category, entry title, and url title prefix.
- Fixed a bug (#21275) where under the right conditions a required custom field could be hidden on the Publish page.
- Fixed a bug (#21276) where categories had the option of setting themselves as their own parent; it was a genealogical nightmare.
- Fixed several bugs where certain relationship template tag combinations would result in a PHP error. You should see the therapy bill.
- Fixed a bug where some model validation errors tried to convert an array to a string.
- Fixed a bug where new sites could not be created via the Site Manager.
- Fixed a bug where PHP 5.3 objected to an array access in the Relationship fieldtype on the publish page.
- Fixed a bug where saving a custom member field wanted you to "Save Layout".
- Fixed a bug where long folder list names were overlapping the toolbars.
- Fixed a bug where remove tools would appear without a left border.
- Added blockquote support to in app add on docs.
- Changed bg color for login screens.

Version 3.0.1
-------------

Release Date: October 26, 2015

- Fixed a bug (#21191) where creating a layout for a channel without categories misbehaved.
- Fixed a bug (#21191) where moving a field into a new tab caused it's hidden tool to malfunction.
- Fixed a bug (#21196) where Core would report a PHP Notice when editing the profile of a member.
- Fixed a bug (#21199) where 404 pages were not seting a 404 header.
- Fixed a bug (#21199) where the "+ New Upload Directory" link resulted in a 404.
- Fixed a bug (#21204) where certain versions of PHP could not determine empty of a function.
- Fixed a bug (#21205) where the Filepicker wouldn't play nice with Core.
- Fixed a bug (#21206) where disabling comments still displayed comment data on the Overview page.
- Fixed a bug (#21213) where turning on "Save Templates as Files" was a little overprotective and rewrote the index template with "Directory access is forbidden."
- Fixed a bug (#21218) where Quick Links were permanent.
- Fixed a bug (#21219) where the template manager was too eager about keeping templates in sync across all sites instead of the current site.
- Fixed a bug (#21220) where moving a required field to a new tab removed the required class.
- Fixed a bug (#21221) where accessing the templates model during a session_start hook threw an exception.
- Fixed a bug (#21224) where PHP would sometimes generate a warning when it tried to delete a file.
- Fixed a bug (#21231) where members were being denied access to add-ons they had access to.
- Fixed a bug (#21233) where an empty line in the spam module caused PHP errors.
- Fixed a bug (#21233) where running apc_delete_file sometimes generated a warning.
- Fixed a bug (#21235) where static template route segments were not being included when using {route=...}
- Fixed a bug where creating a second layout for a channel would result in an Exception.
- Fixed a bug where adding and saving an empty tab to a channel layout prevented further editing of the tab.
- Fixed a bug where alerts were not being displayed while creating a layout and preforming unallowed actions.
- Fixed a bug where a required field could be dropped into a hidden tab.
- Fixed a bug where dismissing alerts on the Create/Edit Form Layout page refreshed the page.
- Fixed a bug where the thumbnail view of the filepicker was not responsive.
- Add-ons are no longer "Removed", they are "Uninstalled".
- Fixed a bug where 'yes' and 'no' weren't localizable. Lo siento.
- Removed CSS that forced capitalization on `.choice`

Version 3.0.0
-------------

Release Date: October 13, 2015


- Control Panel

  - General

    - Responsive design is a pleasure on mobile devices.
    - 100% image free, fast and beautiful on regular and high density displays
    - Inline error messages consistently used on all forms.
    - The control panel navigation and logic is now based on the idea of **Content Creators** and **Site Builders**, with navigation related to content creators on the left and site builders on the right.
    - Many application defaults have been modified to reflect how people most often use ExpressionEngine.
    - Control Panel landing pages are customizable per member group, or even per member
    - In-app links to the documentation, support, and bug tracker are visible to member groups of your choice.
    - Improved contextual search in the control panel.
    - Uses a consistent visual language across the board.
    - Enabling/disabling CAPTCHA has been consolidated to a single site-wide setting.
    - Unified Upload Directories: Everything that used to be a special folder (Member photos, avatars, etc..) is now available in the File Manager and can use the usual file manipulations and other upload preferences.
    - Smart interactions (for example, if you have no channels, then clicking **Create** will take you to the channel manager to make one).
    - Bulk actions don't clutter the UI, they onlyappear only when needed.
    - The new style guide allows both 1st and 3rd party to build awesome UX.
    - The new design will allow simple iterative niceties in the future, such as adding some minimal color and branding for your clients.
    - Comments are no longer a separate module. Comments can be accessed from the Overview page.
    - Accessories no longer exist.
    - Quicklinks and custom tabs were consolidated into only Quicklinks.
    - Table zebra-striping JS has been removed. Zebra-striping is handled automatically by the CSS.
    - Pre-populating the Name and URL fields of quicklinks when the + New Link button is clicked.
    - Added a default modal view setting to upload destinations.

  - Overview Page

	 - The **Home Page** is now the overview page.
	 - Completely rewritten to show a quick overview of your content, including  recent comments, member counts and latest entry information.

  - Create

    - Content -> Publish has moved to the top level Create tab.
    - Improved category create modal.
    - The Publish Layout manager has moved to its own page in the Channel  Manager.
    - Titles can now have different labels, set in the Channel Manager.
    - Improved behavior of entry filtering in Relationship fields on the publish form so it searches all entries.

  - Edit

	 - Content -> Edit has moved to the top level Edit tab.
	 - The search has live filtering, and you can now bookmark the results directly.

  - Files

	 - Content -> Files has moved to the top level Edit tab.

  - Members

	 - Member Group permissions are now more granular.

  - Developer Tools

    - Channel Manager

      - Admin -> Channel Administration is now a subsection under developer tools. All Channel, Status, Category and Field settings are accessed here.
      - Channel layouts have a dedicated form for managing the publish/edit layouts.
      - Categories have drag and drop sorting and nesting.

    - Template Manager

      - Moved from Design -> Templates -> Template Manager
      - Snippets were renamed **Template Partials**
      - Global variables were renamed **Template Variables**
      - Synchronization page removed as this is now fully automated.
      - Consistency in the display of any **System templates** (Email, Members, Forums, etc.).

    - Site Manager

      - Access to the manager moved from the site title dropdown.
      - Removed the ability to duplicate existing sites.

    - Add-On Manager

      - Add-ons are no longer a top level menu tab.
      - Add-ons are all on one page.
      - Third party plugins are grouped together.
      - Plugins must now be installed as part of the move toward more consistent behavior.
      - Built-in non-optional add-ons are hidden from the table

    - Utilities

      - Consolidated several **Tools** sections: Communicate, Utilities and  Data.
      - Extension debugging section added here to allow disabling of  individual extensions.

    - Logs

      - Moved from Tools -> Logs

  - Settings

    - The new **Settings** page consolidates a number of settings that were scattered throughout the version 2 control panel.  Notably the **Global Template**, *Member message and avatar** and **Comment** preferences can be found here.  That's in addition to the other preferences that move over from the version 2 **Admin** tab.

- Multiple Site Manager

  - Now included with ExpressionEngine.
  - All ExpressionEngine licenses come with one site and you only pay for additional sites, not the ability to add additional sites.
  - When you upgrade your ExpressionEngine license, you can merge in a Multiple Site Manager license to add sites to that license.

- Discussion Forums

  - Now included with ExpressionEngine.

- Spam Module

  - Unified anti-spam service for first and third party code.
  - Comes pre-trained for common spam, but can be further trained your site's specific content.
  - No subscription needed and all data remains on your site.
  - Training data is exportable for sharing with others and future site builds.

- Installer

  - One-page installation.
  - Updating is much easier thanks to the new user servicable directory. Just replace ``system/ee`` and ``themes/ee`` and update.
  - Third-party add-ons are no longer updated during the EE update.

- General Changes

  - Removed Referrer module.
  - Removed Mailing List module.
  - Removed Wiki module.
  - Template routes can now be set in the config file.
  - Improved template route parsing.
  - Improved Profiler and Debugging.
  - Screen Names no longer have to be unique.
  - Updated Markdown Extra to v1.5.0.
  - Changed password maximum length to 72 characters.
  - Added ``{if no_results}`` to ``{categories}`` tag pair in ``{exp:channel:entries}`` loop
  - Added ``{if no_results}`` to ``{exp:channel:categories}``
  - A custom database port can be specified in the database configuration array

- Developers

  - All new :doc:`Model Service </development/services/model/index>` which replaces our APIs.
  - Added a :doc:`Dependency Injection Container </development/core/dependencies>`.
  - Channel fields, Member fields, and Category fields now all use the same API
  - New FilePicker service for displaying file browser modals
  - Use the `require_captcha` setting to determine whether to require CAPTCHA or not for your front-end forms.
  - Module tab API has changed. See `tab.pages.php` for a working example. In short, the methods are now `display($channel_id, $entry_id)`, `validate($entry, $data)`, `save($entry, $data)`, `delete($entry_ids)`.
  - Deleted:

    - ``Api_channel_entries::send_pings()``
    - ``DB_Cache::delete()``
    - ``Filemanager::frontend_filebrowser()``
    - ``Functions::clear_spam_hashes()``
    - ``Functions::set_cookie()``
    - ``Member_model::get_localization_default()``
    - File helper's `get_mime_by_extension()`
    - Magpie plugin
    - Version helper
    - Channels-specific pagination hooks
    - SafeCracker hooks
    - ``edit_template_start`` hook
    - ``update_template_end`` hook

  - Deprecated:

    - ``cp_url()`` helper method, use ``ee('CP/URL')`` instead.
    - Extension's ``universal_call()``, use ``call()`` instead.
